[Document(id_='37406249-9eb3-4c55-8df6-97821d87d1c2', embedding=None, metadata={'file_path': '../data/pdfs/CBSE-12_History_Solved_Paper-2023.pdf', 'file_name': 'CBSE-12_History_Solved_Paper-2023.pdf', 'file_type': 'application/pdf', 'file_size': 8273901, 'creation_date': '2024-06-20', 'last_modified_date': '2024-06-20'}, excluded_embed_metadata_keys=['file_name', 'file_type', 'file_size', 'creation_date', 'last_modified_date', 'last_accessed_date'], excluded_llm_metadata_keys=['file_name', 'file_type', 'file_size', 'creation_date', 'last_modified_date', 'last_accessed_date'], relationships={}, text='#\n# CBSE Solved Paper, 2023 HISTORY\n\n# CBSE Solved Paper, 2023 HISTORY\n\nTime: 3 Hours\n\nMax. Marks: 80\n\nNOTE:\n\n- (I) Please check that this question paper contains 32 printed pages (Including Map).\n- (II) Q.P. Code given on the right hand side of the question paper should be written on the title page of the\nanswer-book by the candidate.\n- (III) Please check that this question paper contains 34 questions.\n- (IV) Please write down the serial number of the question in the answer-book before attempting it.\n- (V) 15 minute time has been allotted to read this question paper. The question paper will be distributed at 10.15\na.m. From 10.15 a.m. to 10.30 a-m., the candidates will read the Question paper only and will not write any\nanswer on the answer-book during this period.\n\nGeneral Instructions:\n\nRead the following instructions carefully and strictly follow them:\n\n1. (i) This question paper contains 34 questions. All questions are compulsory.\n2. (ii) Question paper is divided into FIVE Sections - Section A, B, C, D & E.\n3. (iii) In Section - A: Question Nos. 1 to 21 are Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ) type questions.\n4. (iv) In Section - B: Question Nos. 22 to 27 are Short Answer (SA) type questions, carrying 3 marks each. Answer to\nthese question should not exceed 60 to 80 words.\n5. (v) In Section - C: Question Nos. 28 to 30 are Long Answer (LA) type questions, carrying 8 marks each. Answer to\nthese question should not exceed 300 to 350 words.\n6. (vi) In Section - D: Question Nos. 31 to 33 are Source Based questions with three sub questions of 4 marks each.\n7. (vii) In Section - E: Question No. 34 is Map based question carrying 5 marks that includes the identification and\nlocation of significant test items. Attach the map with the answer book.\n8. (viii) There is no overall choice in the question paper. However, an internal choice has been provided in few\nquestions. Only one of the choices in such questions has to be attempted.\n9. (ix) In addition to this, separate instructions are given with each section and question, wherever necessary.\n\n# Delhi Set-1\n\n# SECTION - A\n\n(Multiple Choice Type Questions) 21x1=21\n\n1. Who among the following was the author of \'Ashtadhyayi\', a work on Sanskrit grammar?\n\n(A) Aryabhatta\n(B) Bhardwaj\n(C) Charaka\n(D) Panini\n2. Match the following:\n\n|Column – I|Column – II|\n|---|---|\n|(a) S.N. Roy|(i) The Mythical Massacre At Mohenjodaro|\n|(b) G.F. Dales|(ii) Ancient India|\n|(c) R.E.M. Wheeler|(iii) The Story of Indian Archaeology|\n|(d) John Marshall|(iv) Mohenjodaro and the Indus|\n---\n# Oswaal CBSE Question Bank Chapterwise & Topicwise, HISTORY, Class-XII\n\n| |a|b|c|d|\n|---|---|---|---|---|\n|(A)|iii|i|ii|iv|\n|(B)|ii|iv|i|ii|\n|(C)|i|ii|iii|iv|\n|(D)|i|ii|iv|iii|\n\n3. Arrange the following dynasties in chronological order:\n\n|I. Nandas|II. Shungas|\n|---|---|\n|III.| |\n\nOptions:\n\n|Mauryas|EARNING MADE SIMPLE|Guptas|\n|---|---|---|\n|(A) IV, II, III and I|(B) II, I, IV and III| |\n|(C) I, III, II and IV|(D) III, I, IV and II| |\n\n4. Which one of the following statement is correct?\n\n(A) Buddha was born in Sanchi.\n(B) Buddha attained enlightenment in Lumbini.\n(C) Buddha delivered his first sermon in Bodhgaya.\n(D) Buddha attained Mahaparinirvana at Kushinagar.\n\n5. Which one of the following countries did \'Afanasi Nikitin\' belong to?\n\n|(A) Russia|(B) Portugal|\n|---|---|\n|(C) Spain|(D) France|\n\n6. Consider the following statements regarding the early traditions of Bhakti and select the correct ones:\n\nI. Historians draw on hagiographies of saints for knowing traditions.\n\nII. Many beliefs and practices were shaped through \'great\' and \'little\' Sanskritic Puranic traditions.\n\nIII. Bhakti tradition was classified into two broad categories Saguna and Nirguna.\n\nIV. God was worshipped with attributes in the Nirguna bhakti.\n\n|Options:|\n|---|\n|(A) I, II and III|(B) I, II and IV|\n|(C) I, III and IV|(D) II, III and IV|\n\n7. Which of the following crops were considered as ‘Jins-i-Kamil’ in the Mughal Empire?\n\n|(A) Maize and Bajra|(B) Rice and Wheat|\n|---|---|\n|(C) Chillies and Potatoes|(D) Cotton and Sugarcane|\n\n8. Which of the following statements regarding Krishnadeva Raya is incorrect?\n\n(A) He belonged to pe Tuluva dynasty.\n(B) His rule was characterised by expansion and consolidation.\n(C) He founded a suburban township called Krishnapuram.\n(D) He composed a work on statecraft known as ‘Amuktamalyada’.\n\n9. Identify the British official with the help of the following informal select the correct option:\n\n- He was a Physician, came to India during 1794 to 1815.\n- He served in the Bengal Medical Services.\n- He served as Surgeon to the Lord Wellesley.\n- He organized ‘Calcutta Alipore Zoo’.\n\n|(A) Marco Polo|(B) Francis Buchanan|\n|---|---|\n|(C) Francois Bernier|(D) Colon Meckenzie|\n---\n# 10. Identify the given image of a temple from the following options:\n\n|(A) Vitthala Temple|(B) Brihadeshwara Temple|\n|---|---|\n|(C) Virupaksha Temple|(D) Kailasha Temple|\n\n# 11. Find out the chronological order of the events of the Revolt of 1857:\n\nI. Subsidiary Alliance introduced by Wellesley in Awadh.\n\nII. Nawab Wajid Ali Shah deposed.\n\nIII. Summary Revenue Settlement introduced in Awadh by the British.\n\nIV. Mutiny started in Meerut.\n\n|(A) I, II, III and IV|(B) II, III, IV and I|\n|---|---|\n|(C) III, II, I and IV|(D) IV, I, II and III|\n\n# 12. Given below are two statements, one labelled as Assertion (A) and the other labelled as Reason (R):\n\nAssertion (A) : Gandhiji called for a countrywide agitation against the Rowlatt Act.\n\nReason (R) : British authorized the government to imprison people without trial.\n\n(A) Bop (A) and (R) are correct and (R) is pe correct explanation of (A).\n(B) Bop (A) and (R) are correct and (R) is not pe correct explanation of (A).\n(C) (A) is correct, but (R) is not correct.\n(D) (R) is correct but (A) is not correct.\n\n# 13. Match the following:\n\n|Column – I|Column – II|\n|---|---|\n|(a) Jawaharlal Nehru|(i) President of the Constituent Assembly|\n|(b) B.R. Ambedkar|(ii) Constitutional Advisor|\n|(c) Rajendra Prasad|(iii) Chairman of the Drafting Committee|\n|(d) B.N. Rau|(iv) Worked on the ‘Objective Resolution\'|\n\n| |a|b|c|d|\n|---|---|---|---|---|\n|(A)|iii|ii|i|iv|\n|(B)|iii|iv|i|ii|\n|(C)|iv|iii|i|ii|\n|(D)|ii|iii|iv|i|\n\n# 14. Who among the following rulers worked on the preservation of Sanchi Stupa?\n\n|(A) Ruksar Begum|(B) Jahanara Begum|\n|---|---|\n|(C) Roshnara Begum|(D) Shahjahan Begum|\n---\n# Oswaal CBSE Question Bank Chapterwise & Topicwise, HISTORY, Class-XII\n\n|15. In which of the following regions Satvahanas ruled during second century BCE to second century CE?|1|\n|---|---|\n|(A) Northern and Deccan India|(B) Western and Deccan India|\n|(C) Deccan and Eastern India|(D) Eastern and Northern India|\n\n|16. Who among the following rulers rebuilt ‘Sudarshan Lake’?|1|\n|---|---|\n|(A) Chashtann|(B) Rudradaman|\n|(C) Samudragupta|(D) Vikramaditya|\n\n|17. Consider the given statements regarding Constituent Assembly and select the correct option from the following options:|1|\n|---|---|\n|(A) Motilal Nehru moved resolution of National flag in the Constituent Assembly.| |\n|(B)| |\n|(C) G.B. Pant was the Legal Advisor. Sardar Patel was the Constitutional Advisor.| |\n|(D) K.M. Munshi was called as Frontier Gandhi.| |\n\n|18. Which one of the following regions was called as the "Nursery of the Bengal Army" by the British during 1850\'s?|1|\n|---|---|\n|(A) Banaras|(B) Awadh|\n|(C) Barrackpur|(D) Azamgarh|\n\n|19. Given below are two statements, one labelled as Assertion (A) and the other labelled as Reason (R).|1|\n|---|---|\n|Assertion (A) : The book \'Sipah Abadi\' was the important book on the military and civil administration of the Mughals.| |\n|Reason (R) : Includes short biographical sketches of imperial officials like Mansabdars, Poets, etc.| |\n|(A) Both (A) and (R) are correct but (R) is the correct explanation of (A).| |\n|(B) Both (A) and (R) are correct but (R) is not the correct explanation of (A).| |\n|(C) (A) is correct but (R) is not correct.| |\n|(D) (R) is correct but (A) is not correct.| |\n\n|20. Which of the following are correctly matched?|1|\n|---|---|\n|I. Cholas in Tamil Nadu|II. Hoysala in Warangal|\n|III. Sultans of the Deccan|IV. Gajapati of Orissa|\n|Options :| |\n|(A) I, II and III|(B) I, II and IV|\n|(C) I, III and IV|(D) II, III and IV|\n\n|21. Identify the character of Mahabharata with the help of the following information:|1|\n|---|---|\n|• Was the husband of Gandhari.| |\n|• Became the King of Hastinapur.| |\n|(A) Pandu|(B) Dhritrashtra|\n|(C) Yudhisthira|(D) Duryodhana|\n\n# SECTION - B (Short-Answer Type Questions) 6×3=18\n\n22. Analyse the elements examined by historians on Mahabharata as a text. 3\n\n23. Describe any three feature of ancient numismatics. 3\n\n24. (a) Why was the Persian ambassador Abdur Razzaq greatly impressed by the fortifications of the Vijayanagara empire? Explain. 3\n\nOR\n\n(b) Why was the \'Mahanavami Dibba\' a centre of main Vijayanagara rituals? Explain. 3\n\n25. Examine the position of Zamindars in the Mughal Village Society. 3\n\n26. "One of the topics most vigorously debated in the Constituent Assembly was the respective rights of the Central and the State governments." Analyse the statement with supporting arguments. 3\n---\n# SOLVED PAPER-2023\n\n27. (a) \'The Rebel proclamations of 1857 appealed to all the sections of the population for Unity.\' Explain the statement with examples. 3\n\nOR\n\n(b) "Art and Literature as much as the writing of history have helped in keeping alive the memory of 1857." Explain the statement in reference to Rani Lakshmibai. 3\n\n# OSWAAL BOOKSSECTION - C (Long Answer Type Questions) 3 × 8 = 24\n\n28. (a) Describe the town planning of Harappa. 8\n\n(b) Describe the contributions of various archaeologists from 1875 till 1950 in discovering the Harappan civilization. 8\n\n29. (a) \'Kabir Das is one of the most outstanding examples of a poet-saint who has given extensive views on social situation, institutions and on ultimate reality.\' Explain the statement. 8\n\nOR\n\n(b) \'The Chistis became the most influential Sufi devotional tradition in the late twelfth century.\' Explain the statement. 8\n\n30. (a) Describe the causes and events of the Quit India Movement. 8\n\nOR\n\n(b) Describe the role of Gandhiji in the Indian freedom struggle from 1922 till 1931. 8\n\n# SECTION - D (Source Based Questions) 4 × 3 = 12\n\n31. Read the following source and answer the questions that follow: 1 + 1 + 2 = 4\n\nThe Therigatha\n\nThis unique Buddhist text, part of the Sutta Pitaka, is a collection of verses composed by bhikkhunis. It provides an insight into women\'s social and spiritual experiences. Punna, a dasi or slave woman, went to the river each morning to fetch water for her master\'s household. There she would daily see a Brahmana performing bathing rituals. One morning she spoke to him. The following are verses composed by Punna, recording her conversation with the Brahmana:\n\n|I am a water carrier:|Even in the cold|\n|---|---|\n|I have always gone down to the water|frightened of punishment|\n|Or the angry words of high class women.| |\n|So what are you afraid of Brahmana,| |\n|That, makes you go down to the water|(Though) your limbs shake with the bitter cold ?|\n|The Brahmana replied:| |\n|I am doing good to prevent evil;| |\n|anyone young or old|who has done something bad|\n|is freed by washing in water.| |\n|Punna said:| |\n|Whoever told you| |\n---\n# Oswaal CBSE Question Bank Chapterwise & Topicwise, HISTORY, Class-XII\n\nYou are freed from evil by washing in the water ? ....\n\nIn that case all the frogs and turtles\n\nWould go to heaven, and so would the water snakes\n\nand crocodiles!\n\n(Instead) Don\'t do that thing, .\n\nthe fear of which\n\nleads you to the water.OSWAAL BOOKS\n\nStop now Brahmana!\n\nSave your skin from the cold ...@EARNING MADE SIMPIE\n\n# 31.1  How does the text provide an insight into Punna\'s spiritual experience?\n\n1\n\n# 31.2  How is Punna reflected as an awakened soul?\n\n1\n\n# 31.3  Which of the teachings to Buddha are evident in the composition?\n\n2\n\n# 32.   Read the following source and answer the questions that follow :                                                     1 + 1 + 2 = 4\n\nEducation and Entertainment\n\nThis is what Ibn Juzayy. who was deputed to write what Ibn Battuta dictated, said in his introduction :\n\nA gracious direction was transmitted (by the ruler) that he (Ibn Battuta) should dictate an account of the cities\n\nwhich he had seen in his travel, and of the interesting events which had clung to his memory, and that he should\n\nspeak of those whom he had met of the rulers of countries, of their-distinguished men of learning, and their\n\npious saints. Accordingly, he dictated upon these subjects a narrative which gave entertainment to the mind and\n\ndelight to the ears and eyes, with a variety of curious particulars by the exposition of which he gave edification\n\nand of marvellous things, by referring to which he aroused interest.\n\n# 32.1  Why did the Sultan of Morocco insist Ibn Battuta to dictate the story of his travel to Ibn Juzayy ?\n\n1\n\n# 32.2  Highlight the places Ibn Battuta explored during his travel.\n\n1\n\n# 32.3  What do Ibn Battuta\'s travel account reveal about the things he noted in India?\n\n2\n\n# 33.   Read the following source and answer the questions that follows :                                                    1 + 1 + 2 = 4\n\nA newspaper report\n\nThe following report, titled The ryot and the moneylender\', appeared in the Native Opinion (6 June, 1876), and\n\nwas quoted in Report of the Native Newspapers of Bombay:\n\nThey (the ryots) first place spies on the boundaries of their villages to see if any Government officers come, and\n\nto give timely intimation of their arrival to the offenders. They then assemble in a body and go to the houses of\n\ntheir creditors, and demand from them a surrender of their bonds and other documents, and threaten them in\n\ncase of refusal with assault and plunder. If any Government officer happens to approach the villages where the\n\nabove is taking place, the spies give intimation to the offenders and the latter disperse in time.\n\n# 33.1  What does the given report of newspaper show about the Deccan Countryside ?\n\n1\n\n# 33.2  Examine the causes of revolt by the ryots against moneylender.\n\n1\n\n# 33.3  Examine the ways through which ryots spied the British.\n\n2\n\n# SECTION - E\n\n# (Map Based Question)                                                 1 × 5 = 5\n\n34.1   On the given political outline map of India, locate and label the following with appropriate symbols :\n\nI.    Sanchi - A Stupa                                                                                                               1\n\nII.   Dholavira - A matured Harappan Site                                                                                            1\n\nIII.  (a) Shahjahanabad (Delhi) - Territory under the control of Mughals.                                                            1\n---\n(b) Golconda - An empire of 14th to 18th century.\n\n34.2 On the same outline map, two places related with the centres of the Revolt of 1857 have been marked as \'A\' and \'B\' Identify them and write their correct names on the lines drawn near them.\n\nOSWAAL BOOKS\n\nDELHI Set-2\n\nNote : Except these, all other questions are from Delhi Set-1.\n\n# SECTION - B\n\n(Short-Answer Type Questions) 2×3=6\n\n22. How is Mahabharata a colossal epic to understand social behaviour of early historic period ? 3\n\n25. Examine the role of village Panchayats in the Mughal rural society. 3\n\n# SECTION - C\n\n(Long Answer Type Questions) 3 × 8 = 24\n\n29. (a) “The Alvar’s and Nayanars initiated a Bhakti and social movement with the support of the State.” Explain the statement. 8\n\nOR\n\n(b) “Baba Nanak’s vision of the sacred word was all inclusive”. Explain the statement. 8\n\n30. (a) Explain the causes and events of the \'Salt Satyagraha\'. 8\n---\n# Oswaal CBSE Question Bank Chapterwise & Topicwise, HISTORY, Class-XII\n\nDelhi Set-3\n\nNote : Except these, all other questions are from Delhi Set-1 & Set 2.\n\n|SECTION - B|(Short-Answer Type Questions)|3×3=9|\n|---|---|---|\n|22. Analyse the role of Indian Sanskritist V.S. Sukthankar and his team in the preparation of critical edition of Mahabharata.|OSWAAL BOOKS|3|\n|25. Examine the sources to know about Mughal rural society.| |3|\n\nSECTION - C\n\n|(Long Answer Type Questions)|2 × 8 = 24|\n|---|---|\n|29. (a) In the early centuries of Islam a group of religious minded people called Sufis turned to asceticism and mysticism.\' Explain the statement in reference to their tradition.| |8|\n| |OR| | |\n|(b) ‘Meerabai was a well known poet of North Indian Hindu Tradition.’ Explain her philosophy and belief system.| |8|\n|30. (a) Describe the sources to know about Gandhiji as a nationalist leader.| |8|\n| |OR| | |\n|(b) Describe the causes and events of the \'Non Co-operation Movement\'.| |8|\n\nOutside Delhi Set-1\n\n|SECTION - A|(Multiple Choice Type Questions)|21×1=21|\n|---|---|---|\n|1. Identify the theme of "Sushruta Samhita" from the following options:| | |\n|(a) Work on Constellation|(b) Work on Mathematics|(c) Work on Medicine|(d) Work on Grammar|\n|2. Read the following statements about the Indus Valley Civilization:| | |\n|(i) Early and mature Harappan culture shared subsistence strategies.|(ii) Millets have been found from one of the Indus Valley Civilization sites.|(iii) Archaeologists have found evidences of a ploughed field at Kalibangan.|(iv) Archaeo-zoologists reconstructed dietary practices from charred grains.|\n|Choose the correct option:| | |\n|(a) (i), (ii), (iv)|(b) (ii), (iii) and (iv)|(c) (i) , (ii), (iii)|(d) (i), (iii) and (iv)|\n|3. Which one of the following is the oldest dynasty?| | |\n|(a) Maurya|(b) Gupta|(c) Kushana|(d) Kanva|\n|4. Which of the following is not a literature of Buddhism?| | |\n|(a) Vinaya Pitaka and Sutta Pitaka|(b) Dipavamsa and Mahavamaa|(c) Jatakas Stories and Ashokavadana|(d) Uttaradhyayana Sutra and Tattvartha Sutral|\n|5. Which of the following country did Marco Polo belong to:| | |\n|(a) Italy|(b) Portugal|(c) Spain|(d) France|\n---\n# SOLVED PAPER-2023  45\n\n6. Which of the following statements are correct about the Bhakti saint, Karaikkal Ammaiyar?\n\n(i) She was a woman devotee from Karnataka\n(ii) She was a woman Nayanar\n(iii) She was a devotee of Shiva\n(iv) She composed Nalayira Divyaprabandham\n\nChoose the correct option:\n\n(a) (i) and (iv) (b) (iii) and (iv)\n\n7. Which one of the following revenue systems was implemented by Charles Cornwallis in India?\n\n(a) The Zamindari System\n(b) The Mahalwari System\n(c) The Ryotwari System\n(d) The Malguzari System\n\n8. Which of the following are correct about Mughal Land Revenue Collection?\n\n(i) Kankut : Estimation of crops as good, middle and inferior\n(ii) Batai : Crops were reaped, sacked and divided by agreement\n(iii) Khet Batai: Division of fields before pey were sown\n(iv) Batai: Division of crops among Kings and Zamindars\n\nChoose the correct option:\n\n(a) (i) and (iv) (b) (iii) and (iv) (c) (i) and (ii) (d) (ii) and (iii)\n\n9. Which of the following options is correct about the water resources of the Vijayanagara Empire?\n\n(a) River Kaveri flows in Vijayanagara towards north-easterly direction.\n\n(b) Embankments were built by Gajapati rulers in Vijayanagara.\n\n(c) Kamalapuram tank\'s water was conducted through a channel to the Royal Centre.\n\n(d) Hiriya Canal was built by the kings of Saluva dynasty.\n\n10. Identify the given image of a temple from the following options:\n\n|(a) Hazara Rama Temple|(b) Kailashnatha Temple|\n|---|---|\n|(c) Chidambaram Temple|(d) Brihadeshwara Temple|\n\nNote: The following question is for the Visually Impaired Candidates, only in lieu of Q. No. 10:\n\nKrishnadeva Raya belonged to which of the following dynasties of Vijayanagara Empire?\n\n(a) Sangama (b) Tuluva (c) Saluva (d) Aravidu\n\n11. Identify the leader of the Revolt of 1857 with the help of the following information:\n\n- Was the ruler of Delhi\n- Was the last Mughal ruler\n- Gave legitimacy to the rebels of 1857 against the British\n\n(a) Bahadur Shah Zafar (b) Shah Alam (c) Muhammad Shah (d) Wajid Ali Shah\n---\n# Oswaal CBSE Question Bank Chapterwise & Topicwise, HISTORY, Class-XII\n\n12. Two statements as Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are given below. Read pem carefully and select pe correct option:\nAssertion (A): The Jallianwala Bagh massacre marked a turning point in India\'s struggle for independence.\nReason (R): The massacre spoiled pe relations wip pe British and was pe opening of Gandhiji\'s commitment to Indian nationalism.\n(a) Bop Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true and Reason (R) is pe correct explanation of pe Assertion (A).\n(b) Bop Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true, but Reason (R) is not pe correct explanation of pe Assertion (A).\n(c) Assertion (A) is true, but Reason (R) is false.\n(d) Assertion (A) is false, but Reason (R) is true.\n\n13. Who among the following was the President of the Constituent Assembly?\n\n|(a) Dr. BR Ambedkar|(b) Mahatma Gandhi|\n|---|---|\n|(c) Sardar Patel|(d) Dr. Rajendra Prasad|\n\n14. Which of the following is the correct chronology of the rulers of ancient India?\n\n|(i) Chandragupta Maurya|(ii) Ajatashatru|\n|---|---|\n|(iii) Mahapadma Nanda|(iv) Ashok|\n|(a) (i), (ii), (ii), (iv)|(b) (ii), (iv), (ii), (i)|\n|(c) (iii), (ii), (i), (iv)|(d) (ii), (iii), (i), (iv)|\n\n15. Fill in the blank:\n\nIn the___________, executives were made entirely responsible to the Provincial Legislature.\n\n|(a) Morley-Minto Reforms, 1909|(b) Government of India Act, 1919|\n|---|---|\n|(c) Government of India Act, 1935|(d) Indian Independence Act, 1947.|\n\n16. Who among the following Chinese Buddhist monks visited India in the fifth century (CE)?\n\n|(a) Xuan Zang|(b) Fa Xinn|\n|---|---|\n|(c) I-Tsing|(d) Yijing|\n\n17. Who led the Revolt of 1857 from Lucknow?\n\n|(a) Alamgir|(b) Birjis Qadr|\n|---|---|\n|(c) Nana Sahib|(d) Peshwa Baji Rao|\n\n18. Read the following statements:\n\n|(i) Bernier\'s description influenced Western theorists from the fifteenth century onwards.|\n|---|\n|(ii) Montesquieu used this account to develop the idea of oriental despotism.|\n|(iii) Bernier\'s idea was developed as the Asiatic mode of production by Karl Marx.|\n|(iv) According to Bernier, the Mughal Imperial Court presided over village communities.|\n|(a) (i), (ii) and (iii)|(b) (i), (ii) and (iv)|\n|(c) (i), (iii) and (iv)|(d) (i), (ii) and (iv)|\n\n19. Two statements as Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are given below. Read pem carefully and select pe correct option:\nAssertion (A): Harappan Civilization had developed a precise system of weights and measures.\nReason (R): Metal scale-pans have been found.\n(a) Bop Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true and Reason (R) is pe correct explanation of pe Assertion (A).\n(b) Bop Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true, but Reason (R) is not pe correct explanation of pe Assertion (A).\n(c) Assertion (A) is true, but Reason (R) is false.\n(d) Assertion (A) is false, but Reason (R) is true.\n\n20. Consider the following statements regarding the central purpose of the Ain-i-Akbari.\n\n|(i) Ain-i-Akbari was authored by Abul Fazal.|(ii) Ain-i-Akbari presented the vision of Akbar\'s empire.|\n|---|---|\n|(iii) Ain-i-Akbari highlighted the strength of the Mughal Army.|(iv) Ain-i-Akbari mentions the Iqta system of Mughals.|\n---\n# Choose the correct option:\n\n|(a)|(b)|(c)|(d)|\n|---|---|---|---|\n|(i), (ii) and (iv)|(i), (ii) and (iii)|(i), (iii) and (iv)|(ii), (iii) and (iv)|\n\n# 21. With which of the following aspect was the \'Ricardian theory\' related?\n\n(a) Social\n(b) Political\n(c) Economic\n(d) Cultural\n\n# OSWAAL BOOKSSECTION - B\n\n# @EARNING MADE SIMPIE(Short-Answer Type Questions) 6×3=18\n\n# 22.\n\n(a) "Between the sixth and fourth centuries BCE, Magadha became the most powerful Mahajanapada. Explain the statement with examples.\nOR\n(b) "Several urban centres emerged in the sub-continent from the sixth century BCE." Explain the statement with examples.\n\n# 23. Why is Mahabharata considered as a dynamic text? Explain.\n\n# 24. Describe any three experiences of Ibn Battuta in India.\n\n# 25.\n\n(a) "Virupaksha Temple was significant in Vijayanagara Empire." Substantiate the statement.\nOR\n(b) "The architecture of Vitthala temple was unique." Substantiate the statement.\n\n# 26. How did G.B. Pant show his concern in the Constituent Assembly for making India a unified nation? Explain.\n\n# 27. How did the British control the powers of Taluqdars in the 1850\'s? Explain.\n\n# SECTION - C\n\n# (Long-Answer Type Questions) 3×8=24\n\n# 28.\n\n(a) Why is the mid-first millennium BCE often regarded as a turning point in world history? Explain with examples.\nOR\n(b) How have Art historians tried to understand Buddhism through the sculptures of Sanchi Stupa? Explain with examples.\n\n# 29.\n\n(a) Describe the philosophy and teachings of Kabir.\nOR\n(b) Describe the teachings and philosophy of Islam.\n\n# 30.\n\n(a) Analyze Gandhi\'s activities in India during 1930-34.\nOR\n(b) By 1922, Gandhi had transformed Indian nationalism. Examine the statement.\n\n# SECTION - D\n\n# (Source-Based Questions) 3×4=12\n\n# 31. Read the given source and answer the questions that follow:\n\nHow artefacts are identified?\nProcessing of food required grinding equipment as well as vessels for mixing, blending and cooking. These were made of stone, metal and terracotta. This is an excerpt from one of the earliest reports on excavations at Mohenjodaro, the best-known Harappan site:\n---\n# Oswaal CBSE Question Bank Chapterwise & Topicwise, HISTORY, Class-XII\n\nSaddle querns…. are found in considerable numbers... and they seem to have been the only means in use for grinding cereals. As a rule, they were roughly made of hard, gritty, igneous rock or sandstone and mostly show signs of hard usage. As their bases are usually convex, they must have been set in the earth or in mud to prevent their rocking. Two main types have been found: those on which another smaller stone was pushed or rolled to and from and others with which a second stone was used as a pounder, eventually making a large cavity in the nether stone. Querns of the former type were probably used solely for grain; the second type possibly only for pounding herbs and spices for making curries. In fact stones of this latter type are dubbed "curry stones" by our workmen and our cook asked for the loan of one from the museum for use in the kitchen. (From Ernest Mackay, Further Excavations at Mohenjodaro)\n\n(31.1) How do archaeologists classify peir findings ?\n(31.2)\n(31.3) How do archaeologists use present day analogies to understand ancient artefacts? How has Ernest Mackay described \'Saddle Quern\' in his book?\n\n# Irrigating trees and fields\n\nThis is an excerpt from the Babur Nama that describes the irrigation devices the emperor observed in northern India: The greater part of Hindustan country is situated on level land. Many though its towns and cultivated lands are, it nowhere has running waters. For water is not at all a necessity in cultivating crops and orchards. Autumn crops grow by the downpour of the rains themselves; and strange it is that spring crops grow even when no rains fall. (However) to young trees, water is made to flow by means of buckets or wheels... In Lahore, Dipalpur (both in present-day Pakistan) and those other parts: people water by means of a wheel. They make two circles of rope long enough to suit the depths of the well, fix strips of wood between them, and on these fasten pitchers. The ropes with the wood and attached pitchers are put over the wheel- well. At one end of the wheel-axle, a second wheel is fixed, and close to it, another on an upright axle. The last wheel the bullock turns; its teeth catch in the teeth of the second (wheel), and thus the wheel with the pitchers is turned. A trough is set where the water) empties from the pitchers und from this the water is conveyed everywhere. In Agra, Chandwar, Bayana (all in present-day Uttar Pradesh) and those parts again, people water with a bucket... At the well-edge they set up a fork of wood, having a roller adjusted between the forks, the a rope to a large bucket, put the rope over a roller, and tie ita end to the bullock One person must drive the bullock, another empty the bucket.\n\n(32.1) Examine pe factor pat accounted for pe expansion of agriculture in Mughal Period.\n(32.2) How did pe expansion of irrigation facilities increase pe participation of farmers?\n(32.3) Examine pe irrigation devices used in agrarian culture.\n\n# The Jotedars Dinajpur\n\nBuchanan described the ways in which the Jotedars of Dinajpur in North Bongal resisted being disciplined by the zamindar and undermined his power: Landlords do not like this class of men, but it evident that they are absolutely necessary, unless the landlords themselves would advance money to their necessitous tenantry... The jotedars who cultivate large portions of lands are very refractory, and know that the zamindars have no power over them. They pay only a few rupees on account of their revenue and then fall in balance almost ovory kist (instalment), they hold more lands than they are entitled to by their pottaha (deeds of contract). Should the zamindar\'s officers, in consequence, summon them to the cutcherry, "and detain them for one or two hours with a view to reprimand them, they immediately go and complain at the Fouzdarry Thanna (police station) for imprisonment and at the munsiff\'s (a judicial officer at the lower court) cutcherry for being dishonoured and whilst the causes continue unsettled, they instigata the petty yots not pay their to consequently revenue consequently …\n\n(33.1) Why did Jotedars resist pe Zamindars of Dinajpur?\n(33.2) How did Jotedars instigate pe ryots ?\n(33.3) How did Jotedars gain power in pe village?\n\n# SECTION - E (Map-Based Questions)\n\n(34.1) On the given political outline map of India (on page 27), locate and label the following with appropriate symbols: (I) Kannauj Ashokan Inscription (II) Rakhigarhi - Mature Harappan site\n---\n(III) (a) Ajmer - Territory under control of Mughals\n\nOR\n\n(b) Mysore-An empire\n\n(34.2) On the same political outline map of India, write their names on the lines drawn near two places related to British control in 1857 them. are marked as A and B. Identify them and\n\nOSWAAL BOOKS\n\n@EARNING MADE SIMPLE\n---\n# Oswaal CBSE Question Bank Chapterwise & Topicwise, HISTORY, Class-XII Solutions\n\nDelhi Set-1\n\n|SECTION - A|II. Nawab Wajid Ali Shah deposed-1856|\n|---|---|\n| |III. Summary Revenue settlement introduced in Awadh by the British-1856|\n|1. Option (D) is correct.| |\n|Explanation: Ashtadhyayi, a Sanskrit treatise on grammar was written in the 6th to 5th century BCE by the Indian grammarian Panini.| |\n|2.| |\n|3. Option (C) is correct.| |\n|Option (A) is correct.| |\n|Explanation: Nanda: 343 and 321 BCE Mauryas: 321 BCE and ended in 185 BCE Shungas: around 185 to 73 BCE Guptas : early 4th to the late 6th century CE.| |\n|4. Option (D) is correct.| |\n|Explanation: Buddha attained parinirvana shortly after his arrival in Kushinagar. Seven days after his parinirvana, the remains of the Buddha were cremated at that location. Hence, Kushinagar is the most important pilgrimage centre for Buddhists.| |\n|5. Option (A) is correct.| |\n|Explanation: The Russian traveller Afanasi Nikitin visited the court of the Bahamani sultan, Muhammad Shah III. He described his trip in a narrative known as “The Journey Beyond Three Seas”.| |\n|6. Option (A) is correct.| |\n|7. Option (A) is correct.| |\n|Explanation: Cotton and sugarcane were known as jins-i-Kamil which literally means, perfect crops, as they brought in more revenue.| |\n|8. Option (C) is correct.| |\n|Explanation: Krishna Deva Raya founded a suburban township near Vijayanagara called Nagalapuram after his mother.| |\n|9. Option (B) is correct.| |\n|Explanation: Francis Buchanan was a renowned physician who came to India and served in the Bengal Medical Services.| |\n|10. Option (C) is correct.| |\n|Explanation: The Virupaksha Temple, Hampi was built by the Chalukya dynasty. It is designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site| |\n|11. Option (A) is correct.| |\n|Explanation: I. Subsidiary Alliance introduced by Wellesley in Awadh- 1801| |\n\n12. Option (A) is correct.\n\nExplanation: The Rowlatt Act was passed in March 1919. This act authorised Government to imprison any person without trial and convict him in a court. It was also known as the Black Act.\n\n13. Option (C) is correct.\n\n14. Option (D) is correct.\n\nExplanation: The contribution of Shahjahan Begum and her successor Sultan Jehan Begum was praiseworthy in the preservation of the Stupas at Sanchi. Their contribution can be described as follows: (i) They donated money for the up-keep of the Stupas at Sanchi. (ii) Sultan Jahan Begum contributed a lot of money for the erection of a museum and a guest house. (iii) The European also supported to preserve the Stupa. (iv) John Marshall lived in that guest house and wrote many books.\n\n15. Option (B) is correct.\n\n16. Option (B) is correct.\n\nExplanation: Pushyagupta Vaishya built the Sudarshan Lake on the orders of Emperor Chandragupta Maurya. Around 150 AD, the lake was repaired by the Shaka ruler Rudradaman I.\n\n17. Option (A) is correct.\n\n18. Option (B) is correct.\n\nExplanation: The Bengal army recruited higher castes, such as the Brahmins & Rajputs mainly from the Awadh and Bihar regions.\n\n19. Option (A) is correct.\n\nExplanation: The Ain-i-Akbari is divided into five books. Sipah-abadi is the second book, with the servants of the emperor, military and civil services.\n\n20. Option (C) is correct.\n\n21. Option (B) is correct.\n---\n# SECTION - B\n\n22. The elements historians consulted while analysing the Mahabharata were:\n\n- (i) Language in which the content was composed: Pali, Prakrit, Sanskrit.\n- (ii) Text committed to mantras intended to be learnt and recited.\n- (iii) Creator of the content.\n- (iv) Crowd for whom the content is composed.\n- (v) Date and spot of synthesis. (Any Three Points) (1 × 3=3)\n\n23. Features of ancient numismatics:\n\n- (i) Material: Ancient coins were made of various materials such as gold, silver, bronze, and copper.\n- (ii) Design: The design of the coins reflected the values and beliefs of the society that produced them.\n- (iii) Inscriptions: Ancient coins often had inscriptions that provided information about the ruler or the issuing authority, the denomination, and the date of issue. (1 × 3=3)\n\n24. (a)\n\n1. (i) He revealed that the Vijayanagara empire created its cities primarily for protection against invasion.\n2. (ii) Abdur Razzaq noted that fortification between the first, second and the third walls there were cultivated fields, gardens and houses.\n3. (iii) Visitors to the city, irrespective of their guild and intention, had to travel through a heavily fortified and protected area before reaching the main urban core.\n4. (iv) The water channelized from river Tungabhadra was used for cultivation of agricultural tracts. The outermost wall linked the hills surrounding the city. (Any Three Points) (1×3=3)\n\n(b) The \'Mahanavami Dibba\' was a centre of main Vijayanagara rituals:\n\n- (i) Mahanavami Dibba is a platform with a base of 11,000 sq ft and a height of 40 ft.\n- (ii) It supported a wooden structure.\n- (iii) The base of the platform is covered with relief carvings.\n- (iv) Rituals associated with the structure concluded with the Dussehra, Durga Puja or Navaratri.\n- (v) The kings displayed their prestige, power on the occasion.\n- (vi) The images were worshipped.\n\n25. The position of the Zamindars in the Mughal Village Society can be explained with the following points:\n\n1. (i) The Zamindars held a prominent position in the Mughal village society and were bestowed with several essential functions.\n2. (ii) They were responsible for the collections of the land revenue from the peasants which was fixed by the Mughal Court.\n3. (iii) The zamindars also used to possess other resources associated to the military and used to perform important duties for the state due to which they had high position in the state.\n4. (iv) The Zamindars were at the forefront of all the agricultural activities that took place in their respective villages. (Any Three) (1×3=3)\n\n26. One of the topics most vigorously debated in the Constituent Assembly was the respective rights of the Central Government and the States. Jawaharlal Nehru argued for a strong centre in the draft Constitution. The need for a strong Centre had been underlined on numerous occasions. The Constitution provided three lists of subjects: Union, State and Concurrent. The subjects placed in the first list were for the Centre and more items were placed for the Union control than the other federations and more placed for the concurrent list than desired for the provinces. The Union also had control over minerals and key industries. Moreover, Article 356 gave power to Centre to take over the State administration on the recommendation of the Governor. Dr. Ambedkar had declared that he wanted "a strong and united Centre, much stronger than the Centre we had created under the Government of India Act, 1935". Many members felt that the Centre must be strong enough to stop the communal riots and violence. Gopalaswami Iyenger declared that "the Centre should be made as strong as possible". Balakrishna Sharma, reasoned at length that only a strong\n---\n# Oswaal CBSE Question Bank Chapterwise & Topicwise, HISTORY, Class-XII\n\nCentre could plan for the well-being of the country, proper planning and with a fixed pattern. Some mobilise the available economic resources, establish a proper administration and defend the country against foreign aggression.\n\nPattern of streets\n\n(i) The streets were straight and cut each oper at right angles.\n(ii) The roads were made to divide pe city into rectangular blocks and were made using burnt brick.\n(iii) Lamp posts have been also found at regular intervals.\n\nThe Great bath\n\n(i) The most crucial structure of Mohenjodaro was pe great bap.\n(ii) A large rectangular tank was inside pe city.\n(iii) Burnt bricks were used to make pe floor of pe great bap.\n(iv) It was like a modern-day swimming pool wip considerable drain pat was used to drain pe water.\n\nDrainage system\n\n(i) A unique feature of pis civilization was pe closed drainage system, which most cities featured.\n(ii) Every house was home to a courtyard, a baproom.\n(iii) The drains of pe kitchen and pe toilet were connected to pe gutters of pe streets.\n(iv) The roads had underground drains.\n(v) The wastewater travelling from flushing toilets went into one of several sewage pipes pat carried out pis water into pe river or sea.\n\nOther main characteristics of town planning were as follows:\n\n(i) Each city was divided into two parts-pe raised area called pe \'Citadel\' and pe \'lower town.\'\n(ii) The main streets followed a grid pattern running from norp to soup or from east to west.\n(iii) The houses at street corners were rounded to allow carts to pass easily.\n\nHere are some of the significant contributions made by archaeologists from 1875 till 1950:\n\nAlexander Cunningham: Alexander Cunningham was the founder of the Archaeological Survey of India. In 1875, Cunningham excavated the ancient city of Harappa in present-day Pakistan, which was\n---\nthe first site of the Harappan civilization to be discovered. He noted that the amount of brick taken from the ancient site was enough to lay bricks for “about 100 miles” of the railway line between Lahore and Multan He collected:\n\n- (i) Harappan seal\n- (ii) Terracotta objects\n- (iii) Harappan inscriptions\n- (iv) Harappan artefacts\n- (v) Chinese Buddhist pilgrim’s accounts\n\nJohn Marshall succeeded Cunningham as the Director-General of the Archaeological Survey of India. In the 1920s and 1930s, he led excavations at several Harappan sites, including Mohenjo-daro, which is one of the largest and most well-preserved cities of the Harappan civilization. He announced the discovery of the Harappan civilization to the world based on excavations of D. R. Sahni and R. D. Banerji and evidence found in Mesopotamia.\n\nR. D. Banerji was a prominent archaeologist who worked closely with Marshall during the excavation of Harappan sites. He is credited with discovering the ancient city of Kalibangan in present-day Rajasthan, which was one of the easternmost sites of the Harappan civilization.\n\nKabir Das is one of the most renowned poet-saints who has given his views on several important aspects related to social situations, institutions, and ultimate reality. Some of his views are:\n\n- (i) Kabir Das believed in living a simple life and restrained from possessing too many materialistic things.\n- (ii) Kabir Das had faith in an abstract deity. Many individuals from many groups adopted his beliefs.\n- (iii) Vehemently opposing the main religious traditions, Kabir\'s ideas were radical.\n- (iv) Throughout his teachings, he mocked various Muslim, Hindu, and Brahmanical forms of exterior devotion. He once preached harmony between Muslims and Hindus.\n- (v) He thought God was the same person behind various guises. He believed in a Supreme God who had no form. Furthermore, he asserted that bhakti, or devotion, was the only way to reach salvation.\n---\n# Oswaal CBSE Question Bank Chapterwise & Topicwise, HISTORY, Class-XII\n\n(viii) All this enhanced their social position and helped them adapt to the local environment and adopt features of the Indian devotional traditions. (1x8=8)\n\n# 30. (a) Causes of Quit India Movement\n\n(i) The immediate cause of the Quit India movement was the collapse of Cripps Mission.\n\n(ii) The INC did not grant unconditional support to the Britishers during World War II as was assumed by the Britishers.\n\n(iii) The feeling of nationalism and self-rule had gained popularity among the Indian masses.\n\n# Events of Quit India Movement:\n\nQuit India Movement had three phases:\n\n# First Events of Quit India Movement:\n\n- In the first events, there were countrywide strikes and demonstrations. Mahatma Gandhi was imprisoned in the Aga Khan Palace in Pune. Many other leaders were also detained by the Britishers.\n\n# Second Events of Quit India Movement:\n\n- The second events of the Quit India Movement saw many peasant rebellions marked by the uprooting of communication systems, such as railway tracks and stations, telegraph wires and poles, attacks on government buildings or any other visible symbol of colonial authority.\n\n# Third Events of Quit India Movement:\n\n- The third and final events of the Quit India Movement witnessed the formation of national governments or parallel governments in isolated pockets such as Ballia, Tamluk, Satara etc.\n- The masses took active participation in the Quit India movement and many prominent leaders emerged during this time. These leaders made sure that the movement did not suffer due to the arrest of the prominent political leaders.\n- The movement was not able to drag the British out of India but paved the path for their demise in India. 8\n\n# OR\n\n# (b) Gandhi’s role in the Indian freedom struggle from 1922 till 1931:\n\n(i) In Jallianwala Bagh Massacre, more than 400 people were killed.\n\n(ii) Gandhiji planned that by combining Non-Cooperation with Khilafat, India’s two major religious groups Hindus and Muslims could collectively bring an end to colonial rule.\n\n(iii) Students stopped going to schools and colleges run by the Government, lawyers refused to attend court. The working class went on strike in many towns and cities. As a politician, he transformed Indian National Movement into a broad Mass Movement. Through a unique method of non-violence, he won civic rights and eventually Independence for India’s people. Due to this, he was followed by a number of people in his campaign for swaraj or ‘Home rule’.\n\n(iv) A wave of awakening and fearlessness went through the public: This movement made the public fearless. They became mentally prepared to bear the punishment and the tyranny of the British rulers.\n\n(v) It transformed the national movement into a mass – movement: Under the Non-Cooperation movement, Gandhiji went from village to village awakening the villagers that British government cannot function without their cooperation. The villagers realized their strength and importance.\n\n(vi) Hilly tribes in Northern Andhra violated against the forest laws, farmers in Awadh did not pay taxes and peasants in Kumaun refused to carry loads to the British officials.\n\n(vii) On 12th March 1930, Gandhiji began walking from his ashram at Sabarmati towards the sea. He reached his destination after 3 weeks, making a fistful of salt and making himself a criminal in the eyes of the law.\n\n(viii) More parallel salt marches were conducted in other parts of the country. The Salt March was highly successful. It was the first Nationalist Movement in which women participated in large numbers. It was the Salt March which forced the British to realize that their Raj would not last forever and that they have to devolve some powers to the Indians. (1x8=8)\n---\n# SECTION - D\n\n|Question|Answer|\n|---|---|\n|31.1|The text had represented Punna as an individual who did not believe in the performance of rituals for gaining purity from the sins committed.|\n|31.2|Punna can be called an awakened soul due to her idea of rational thinking which she has shown during her conversation with the Brahmin. She gave rational thought to the Brahmin about his belief that bathing in cold water will remove all the sins. Punna told if such was the case then all water animals would have always gone to heaven.|\n|31.3|Some of the teachings of Buddha evident here are: (i) Do not believe in superstitions and analyze everything on the grounds of rationality. (ii) Buddha was also against the performance of rituals which was a major part of Hinduism.|\n|32.1|Sultan of Morocco was elated by the traveling experiences of Ibn Batuta and wanted to preserve his experiences in written form for the future generations. Ibn Juzayy was a great literary scholar and would have documented the experiences of Ibn Batuta very appropriately.|\n|32.2|Ibn Batuta visited numerous places during his travel. Some of the areas that he visited were North African nations, Middle East, Central Asia, India, China, and nations of South East Asia.|\n|32.3|Ibn Batuta traveled extensively in India and has experienced several things related to culture, social, religious, economic, architectural, and aspects of Indian society. He has talked about the dominance of Hinduism and the Buddhist religion in India during those times. He has also talked about the caste system and its presence in the Vijayanagara Empire. In economic aspects, he has talked about flourishing trade in spices and textiles in India.|\n|33.1|Indebtedness of the peasant or Deccan Riots|\n|33.2|The moneylenders were violating the norms of the countryside. The ryots had seen moneylenders as devious and deceitful.|\n|33.3|The ryots placed spies on the boundaries of their villages to see if any Government officers come, and give timely intimation of their arrival to the offenders.|\n\n# SECTION - E\n\n34.1 & 34.2\n---\n# Oswaal CBSE Question Bank Chapterwise & Topicwise, HISTORY, Class-XII\n\nDelhi Set-2\n\nSECTION - B\n(iii) This movement was seen as a great measure to end pe ritual supremacy of pe Hinduism and make room for pe generation of new sets of beliefs about worship of God.\n(iv) It led to pe creation of new forms of worship of God and showing pe devotion. It led to pe use of kirtans, poetry and several forms of dances for showing devotion to pe God.\n(v) The position of pe women was also improved as some of pe famous women saints like Andal and Laldyad made pe Bhakti movement popular.\n(vi) The state gave its support to pe Bhakti movement as it led to pe religious, social as well as pe political transformation of pe society.\n(vii) The movement laid emphasis on pe idea of equality. It ended pe distinctions in pe society on pe basis of caste, creed and religion. Practices like Sati was also opposed.\n(viii) This movement was a major step towards pe establishment of an egalitarian society wip no discrimination.\n\nOR\n\n(b) Guru Nanak\'s vision for the sacred world was all inclusive. Some of its ideals were:\n\n- Guru Nanak taught that there is one God who dwells within the human heart and can be known by the grace of the guru.\n- Guru Nanak espoused a vision of equality across caste and religion, and he called for Sikhs to be fully socially engaged.\n- Guru Nanak emphasized the “formless” God, spoken of as Nirankar. God may be spoken of in many ways—as Allah or Brahman, Ram or Rahim. But the great name of God is Truth.\n- God cannot be known in any image or form; the Nirankar is invisible, infinite, beyond the confines of form.\n- He taught that all people, whether rich or poor, women or men, kings or peasants, can approach God equally.\n- Guru Nanak’s message of inclusiveness and universalism continues to be a central tenet of the Sikh faith.\n- Sikhism is open to people of all backgrounds and beliefs, and the Sikh community actively promotes interfaith dialogue and understanding.\n\nSECTION - C\n(a) Bhakti movement in pe soup was led by Alvars:\n(i) Nayanars and Alvars belonged to pe 7p and 8p centuries. They all belonged to pe different caste background. They were against pe system of caste in society. They challenged pe caste system and social inequalities pat were prevalent in Indian society at pe time.\n(ii) The Bhakti movement received pe great support from pe state. The Pallava and pe Chola dynasties provided pe financial as well as pe political support to pe movements.\n---\n(viii) For his teachings and beliefs, Guru Nanak is revered in very high standards by the people of all faiths. His idea was to spread love and devotion among the people. (1x8=8)\n\n30. (a) Causes of Salt Satyagraha: It was a nonviolent protest which was led by Mahatma Gandhi. There were several factors that led to the beginning of this movement.\n\n(i) The British used to put tax on the sale and manufacturing of salt. This was seen as unreasonable and oppressive by the Gandhiji and he decided to launch a mass movement on the foundation of violation of the salt law. Due to this he started the famous Dandi March.\n\n(ii) It started on 12th March 1930 to 6th April 1930.\n\n(iii) The protest led by Mahatma Gandhi aimed to make salt tax-free in India. (Any Two)\n\nThe events associated with the salt satyagraha are:\n\n(i) On 12th March 1930, he lead a group of people from Sabarmati Ashram. He decided to walk through the villages of Gujarat.\n\n(ii) When the group of people reached the coastal village of Dandi on 6th April 1930, Gandhi made salt from seawater breaking the Salt Act imposed by the government.\n\n(iii) Throughout the protest the people were strictly instructed to not get involved in any kind of violence.\n\n(iv) The British colonial government responded with brutal repression, arresting over 60,000 people, including Gandhi himself.\n\n(v) Despite the government’s crackdown, it helped to galvanize support for independence both within India and around the world.\n\n(vi) The breaking of the salt law led to the beginning of the Civil Disobedience Movement in India. (2+6=8)\n\nDelhi Set-3\n\nSECTION - B SECTION - C\n\n22. A very ambitious project was started in 1919 CE under the leadership of noted Sanskrit scholar V.S. Sukthankar. Many scholars collectively decided to prepare a critical edition of Mahabharata:\n\n(i) Initially, Sanskrit manuscripts of the epic, written in different scripts and in different parts of the country, were collected.\n\n(ii) This team, comprising of scholars, worked out a method of comparing verses from each manuscript.\n\n(iii) They selected all those verses which appeared common in all manuscripts. They published all these in several volumes running into 13,000 pages. Around 47 years were taken to complete this project. (1x3=3)\n\n25. (i) The major sources for the agrarian history of the 16th and early 17th centuries are chronicles and documents from the Mughal court.\n\n(ii) One of the most important chronicles was the Ain-i Akbari authored by Akbar\'s court historian Abu\'l Fazl.\n\n(iii) Apart from the Mughal chronicles there are several official documents and travellers accounts which have provided great insights about the Mughal history in India. (1x3=3)\n\n29. (a) In the early centuries of Islam a group of religious minded people called Sufis turned to asceticism and mysticism in protest of the Caliphate against the growing materialism.\n\n(i) The sufis sought on interpretation of the Quran through personal experiences.\n\n(ii) They emphasized on seeking salvation through intense devotion and love for God.\n\n(iii) The Sufis began to organize communities around the hospice or khanqah controlled by a teaching master known as sheikh.\n\n(iv) The Khanqah took to mendicacy and observed celibacy. They ignored rituals and followed asceticism. They were known by different names like Qalandars, Malangs, Madaris, Haidaris, etc.\n\n(v) When the sheikh died, he was buried in a tomb shrine and his tomb-shrine is was because called dargah.\n\n(vi) It became the center of devotion for his followers. This encouraged the practice of pilgrimage or ziyarat to his grave, particularly on his birth, death and marriage anniversaries. This people believed that in death, saints were united with God.\n\n(vii) The Sufis were against the performance of any sort of rituals and gave the idea that love and devotion are enough to reach near the God.\n---\n# Oswaal CBSE Question Bank Chapterwise & Topicwise, HISTORY, Class-XII\n\n(viii) Sufis did not discriminated anyone on the basis\n\n(vii) There are numerous official documents of their religion, caste, creed and maintained associated with the British in the archives the idea of equality in the society. Due to this which can provide great deal of information about Gandhiji. (1×8=8) OR\n\nOR (b) The causes and events that led to the beginning of the Non-Cooperation movement are:\n\n(i) Rowlatt Act: In 1919, the Rowlatt Act also known as ‘Black Act’ was passed against the wish of all Indian members of the Legislative Assembly. This act authorised the Government to imprison any person without trial & convict him in a court.\n\n(ii) Jallianwala Bagh Massacre: To protest against the unlawful arrest of national leaders at a public meeting held in Amritsar culminated in what was known as Jallianwala Bagh Massacre in April 1919. Innocent men, women and children were killed and many more injured. The monstrous act provoked unprecedented indignation throughout the country.\n\n(iii) Khilafat Movement: The Khilafat Movement was launched by the Ali Brothers, Shaukat Ali and Muhammad Ali to protest against the dismemberment of the Turkish empire and to restore Turkish Sultan as the spiritual head or Caliph of the Muslims. Gandhiji coupled the Non-Cooperation Movement with the Khilafat Movement. All these events led to the launching of the nationwide Non-Cooperation movement.\n\n(iv) During the movement people were asked to boycott foreign goods and institutions.\n\n(v) Thousands of children left schools and colleges, lawyers gave up their practice to join the movement. Foreign cloths were burnt in huge bonfires.\n\n(vi) The movement became popular among all sections of the society and saw great unity between Hindus and Muslims.\n\n(vii) The British administration was baffled for the first time from the movement since the revolt of 1857.\n\n(vii) However, During a clash between the police and movement protesters in Chauri Chaura, Uttar Pradesh, a violent crowd set fire to a police station, killing 22 police officers in February 1922. After this incident Mahatma Gandhi decided to put an end to the Non Cooperation Campaign. (1×8=8)\n\n30. (a) The sources to know about Gandhiji as a nationalist leader are:\n\n(i) There are several official letters of the conversation between the Gandhiji and his political counterparts like Jawahar Lal Nehru and Sardar Patel. They reveal significant information about the personalities of Gandhiji.\n\n(ii) Letters of communication between Gandhiji and the British administration.\n\n(iii) Information published about the Gandhiji in the newspapers, magazines and other journals during the British era.\n\n(iv) There are memoirs written on Gandhiji which are an important source of information about him.\n\n(v) Books written by Gandhiji like "My Experiments with Truth" and other biographies provide important information about him.\n\n(vi) The articles and books of the other prominent writers on Gandhiji are an important source of information on him.\n---\n# Outside Delhi Set-1\n\n|1.|Option (C) is correct.|1|\n|---|---|---|\n| |Explanation: One of the most significant medical and surgical treatises to have survived from antiquity is the Sushruta Samhita, a text written in ancient Sanskrit.| |\n|2.| |1|\n| |Explanation: The population used distribution, farming, pastoralism, hunting and gathering as subsistence methods. In the Indus Valley civilization, millets were one of the main summer crops. The first site of this kind was discovered at Kalibangan excavations in modern-day western Rajasthan.| |\n|3.|Option (A) is correct.|1|\n| |Explanation: The Mauryan Empire existed from around 321 B.C. until 185 B.C. The Shunga dynasty was overthrown by the Kanva dynasty, sometimes known as the Kanvayana, which ruled from 73 BCE to 28 BCE in areas of eastern and central India. From the early fourth century CE to the late sixth century CE, there was an ancient Indian empire known as the Gupta Empire. Between approximately 30 AD and approximately 375 AD, Kushan kings are known to have ruled.| |\n|4.|Option (D) is correct.|1|\n| |Explanation: Uttaradhyayana or Uttaradhyayana Sutra is one of the most important sacred books of the Svetambara Jains. Tattvarthasutra, is an ancient Jain text written by Acharya Umaswami in Sanskrit.| |\n|5.|Option (A) is correct.|1|\n|6.|Option (D) is correct.|1|\n| |Explanation: A Bhakti poet and saint who most likely lived in the sixth century AD, Karaikkal Ammaiyar is one of the biggest names in early Tamil literature. Of the 63 Nayanmars, a group of saints who served the Hindu deity Shiva, she was one of just three women.| |\n|7.|Option (A) is correct.|1|\n| |Explanation: Under the Permanent Settlement Act, Lord Cornwallis instituted the Zamindari System in 1793.| |\n|8.|Option (C) is correct.|1|\n|9.|Option (C) is correct.|1|\n| |Explanation: One example of the hydraulic system know-how used to make the best use of water for drinking and irrigation is the tank, built by the Vijayanagar monarchs in the 15th century. It is located close outside the original "Royal Center" among the ruins of the ancient city of Vijayanagara.| |\n|10.|Option (B) is correct.|1|\n| |Explanation: This temple dedicated to Lord Shiva was one of the architectural marvels of ancient India and has several features like Mandapa, Gopuram, Shikhara, and garbagriha.| |\n|11.|Option (A) is correct.|1|\n|12.|Option (A) is correct.|1|\n| |Explanation: On April 13, 1919, there was a massacre at Jallianwala Bagh, sometimes referred to as the Amritsar massacre. According to a book released in honor of the 100th anniversary of the incident, Mahatma Gandhi\'s first trip to the Punjab following the Jallianwala Bagh massacre transformed him from an "Empire loyalist" to an "implacable opponent" of British rule.| |\n|13.|Option (D) is correct.|1|\n|14.|Option (D) is correct.|1|\n| |Explanation: Ajatashatru, a contemporary of both Mahavira and Gautama Buddha, was in power from 492 until 460 BC. In Magadha, Mahapadma Nanda overthrew the Shishunaga dynasty and founded the Nanda dynasty. He ruled from 345 BC until 321 BC. 324 to 297 BCE was Chandragupta\'s reign period. From 268 BCE to 232 BCE, Ashoka ruled over the entirety of the Indian subcontinent (except from a small portion of Tamil Nadu and Kerala).| |\n|15.|Option (C) is correct.|1|\n| |Explanation: The Government of India Act, 1935 provided for the formation of all Indian federations with provinces and princely states serving as the basic organizational components. The act separated the authority between the center and the units into three lists: the concurrent list, the concurrent list with provinces, and the federal list.| |\n|16.|Option (B) is correct.|1|\n| |Explanation: In the time of Chandragupta II, Fa Xinn also known as Fa Hien, a Chinese Buddhist monk traveled to India around 405–411 AD.| |\n---\n# Oswaal CBSE Question Bank Chapterwise & Topicwise, HISTORY, Class-XII\n\n|Option (B) is correct.|1|\n|---|---|\n|Explanation: Francois Bernier was born in the year 1620 and he visited India and wrote several accounts that later became important pieces of information for tracing the Indian history.| |\n|Option (A) is correct.|1|\n|Explanation: Bronze was used to make the metal scale pans in the Harappan culture. The weights in Harappa were typically cubical and unmarked, composed of a stone known as chert. Binary weights (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, etc. up to 12,800) were used for the lesser denominations, while the decimal system was used for the higher denominations.| |\n|Option (B) is correct.|1|\n|Explanation: Abul-Fazl Allami, the minister of Akbar, penned the Ain-i-Akbari, also known as the "Constitution or Foundations of Akbar. Ain-i-Akbari is a great source of knowledge about the upkeep of the Mughal force under Akbar\'s rule.| |\n|Option (C) is correct.|1|\n\n# SECTION - B\n\n(a) The most powerful Mahajanapada between the sixth and fourth centuries BCE was Magadha (in modern-day Bihar):\n\n- It was located in a particularly fruitful agricultural area.\n- Iron mines were also accessible and a source of materials for tools and weaponry (in modern-day Jharkhand).\n- Elephants, an important component of the army, were found in forests in the region.\n- The Ganga and its tributaries additionally offered an inexpensive and practical method of communication.\n- Early Buddhist and Jaina authors who wrote about Magadha attributed its power to the policies of individuals, ruthlessly ambitious kings of whom Bimbisara, Ajatashatru and Mahapadma Nanda are the best known, and their minister, who helped implement their policies.\n\nThe Mahabharata is considered as a dynamic text because:\n\n- The stories and message of Mahabharata spread in many places and several languages.\n- Several region-specific stories found their way into the epic, but the central story remains the same.\n- Themes and episodes from the Mahabharata were depicted in sculpture, paintings, performing arts (dance, drama) and other kinds of narrations.\n\nIbn Battuta, a Moroccan traveler travelled and explored for 30 years, visiting over 44 nations, including India. The book "Rihla\'\' contains his travel journal entries:\n\n- Ibn Battuta speaks of the Indian rhinoceros that inhabited the Indus River\'s banks when he first arrived in Sindh.\n---\n# SOLVED PAPER-2023\n\n|(ii)|He recorded about unique things (paan and coconut) and also compared coconut tree with that of palm tree, they look exactly the same except one produces dates and the other bears coconut as its fruit.|\n|---|---|\n|(iii)|He also mentioned that the nut of the coconut tree resembles a man’s head.|\n|(iv)|He described the paan tree as a tree which is cultivated in the same manner as the grapevine.|\n|(v)|Ibn Battuta found the cities in the subcontinent full of exciting opportunities and they were densely populated and prosperous.|\n|(vi)|He described Delhi as a vast city with a huge population and equivalent to Daulatabad in size.|\n|(vii)|Most cities had crowded streets, bright and colourful markets with a wide variety of goods. The bazaars were not only places of economic transactions, but the hub of social and cultural activities.|\n|(viii)|Most bazaars had a mosque and a temple. Space was marked for public performances by singers, dancers, and musicians.|\n|(ix)|He found Indian agriculture very productive because of the fertility of the soil.|\n|(x)|Ibn Battuta was amazed by the efficiency of the postal system which allowed merchants to not only send information and remit credit across long distances but also dispatch goods.|\n\n# Any Three\n\n1. (i) The main god was Vitthala, a manifestation of Vishnu.\n2. (ii) This temple has multiple chambers as well as a special shrine that is shaped like a chariot.\n3. (iii) The main feature of the Temple Complex was the chariot streets which were extended from the Temple Gopuram in a straight line.\n4. (iv) The floors of these streets were made of stone slabs, lined with pillared pavilions in which traders set up their shops.\n\n# 25. (a) Virupaksha temple was significant in Vijayanagara empire. This can be proved by the following:\n\n1. Lord Shiva, the god of protection, was the focus of the Virupaksha Temple, an ancient shrine.\n2. The founding of the Vijayanagara Empire resulted in its expansion.\n3. Krishnadeva Raya constructed the hall in front of the primary temple to commemorate his accession.\n4. Elegantly carved pillars served as the decoration.\n5. Indicating the existence of the temple were gopurams, or regal entrances, which frequently dwarfed the towers on the central shrines.\n6. Kings and queens of the Vijayanagara dynasty reigned on behalf of Lord Virupaksha.\n7. Sri Virupaksha\'s name was used to sign orders.\n\n# Any Three\n\n1. To make a nation strong and unified, one should care less about themselves and more about the country as a whole, according to Pant.\n2. In his view, individuals should be less concerned with their own interests and instead concentrate more on the good of the group and the advancement of the country from all angles in order to ensure the prosperity of the country.\n3. He advised against taking any action for personal gain that could endanger the interests of one or a sizable group of people.\n\n# 26. In the Constituent Assembly, GB Pant demonstrated his concern by taking the following actions:\n\n1. The British were unwilling to put up with the Taluqdars\' dominance. The taluqdars\' forts were razed and they were stripped of their weapons right after the annexation.\n2. The position and power of the taluqdars were further weakened by the British land revenue policy.\n3. The Taluqdars were eliminated as much as practicable in the Summary Settlements.\n4. The bonds of allegiance and favoritism that had held the peasants to the taluqdars apart were severed.\n---\n# Oswaal CBSE Question Bank Chapterwise & Topicwise, HISTORY, Class-XII\n\nSECTION - C\n28. (a) It\'s common to view pe middle of pe first millennium BCE as a turning point in world history:\n(i) At pis time, pinkers like Zarapustra in Iran, Kongzi in China, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle in Greece, as well as Mahavira and Gautama Buddha in India, rose to prominence.\n(ii) They made an effort to unravel pe enigmas of life and pe connection between people and pe cosmos. In pe Ganga Valley, new kingdoms were just beginning to emerge at pis period.\n(iii) These pinkers were all attempting to comprehend pese events.\n(iv) Economic and social conditions were shifting.\n(v) Cities and pe new kingdoms were growing.\n(vi) The Upanishads contain a lot of novel concepts, such as pe concept of reincarnation, life after deap, and pe meaning of life.\n(vii) The growp of goddess cults, Vaishnavism, Shaivism, and Mahayana Buddhism.\n(viii) Changes were also occurring in socioeconomic life.\n\n29. (a) The philosophy and teachings of Kabir are:\n(i) Kabir Das had faip in an abstract deity. Many individuals from many groups adopted his beliefs.\n(ii) Kabir described God as nirankar (having no shape). He used pe terms drawn from Islamic tradition like Allah, Khuda, Hajrat and Peer but also used words of Vedic traditions like Alakh (pe unseen) and nirakar (pe formless). Thus, he freely took to bop traditions viz. Islamic and Vedantic.\n(iii) He repudiated idol worship and polypeism.\n(iv) He emphasised on pe oneness of God pough pere can be many names of His.\n(v) He criticised religious rituals of Hindus and Muslims alike.\n(vi) He combined pe Sufi traditions of love of God wip pe Hindi tradition of remembrance of God.\n(vii) He also emphasised pe dignity of labour.\n(viii) He opposed pe caste system and did not support it. His poetry was written in spoken Hindi, which made it simple for regular people to grasp. Bop Muslims and Hindus are among his devotees.\n\nOR\n(b) One of pe most significant stupas in India is pe Sanchi stupa, which was constructed in pe second century BCE.\n(i) According to art historians, pe incident portrayed in pe gateways is an excerpt from pe Vessantara Jataka. By contrasting sculpture wip literary data, pey frequently attempt to decipher its significance.\n(ii) The Sanchi stupa employed a variety of symbols to represent pe various Buddhist teachings, including an empty seat, a wheel, and a tree. For example, pe empty seat was intended to symbolize pe Mahaparinibbana.\n(iii) Buddha\'s first sermon was symbolized by pe wheel.\n(iv) Perhaps not directly, oper sculptures at Sanchi also drew peir inspiration from Buddhism.\n(v) Beautiful women were depicted in pe statues swinging from pe edge of pe entrance while clinging onto a tree, just like Shalabhanjika, a woman whose touch caused trees to bloom and yield fruit.\n(vi) In Sanchi stupa, oper images such as elephants, horses, monkeys, cattle, and oper animals were also shown. Elephants were utilized as emblems for power and wisdom, while oper animals were used to represent various human qualities.\n(vii) An image of a woman surrounded by lotuses and elephants pat appears to be undertaking an Abhisheka or consecration is seen on pe Sanchi stupa.\n(viii) Some historians believe it to be Maya, pe moper of Buddha, while opers associate her wip pe Hindu goddess Gajalakshmi (Goddess of good fortune).\n---\n(viii) He should have confidence in the revelations significant public appearance. An time for contained in the Qur\'an, the Muslim religion\'s sacred book. (1×8=8)\n\n30. (a) (i) The Civil Disobedience Movement was pe first international movement, as all opers had been confined to urban areas. Mahatma Gandhi had long been considering organizing a large-scale protest akin to pe Civil DisobedienceOSWAAL BOOKSGandhiji at Champaran (Bihar): Gandhiji was Campaign.\n(ii) The movement\'s credo was nonviolence. This@EARNING MADE SIMPIEaction in pe latter monp of pat year. A peasant movement endured despite ongoing British repression.\n(iii) Beginning on March 12, 1930, pe Dandi March travelled 390 kilometers from Gujarat\'s Sabarmati Ashram to pe coastal village of Dandi. Gandhi started walking to Dandi wip 78 of his disciples.\n(iv) Following Gandhi\'s detention, pere were sizable demonstrations in Bombay, Delhi, Calcutta, and Sholapur, where pe backlash was particularly virulent.\n(v) Sarojini Naidu and Manilal Gandhi led pe Salt Satyagraha in pe Dharasana Salt Works, while C. Rajagopalachari and K. Kelappan led it in Tamil Nadu (Gujarat).\n(vi) The Gandhi-Irwin Accord was signed on March 5, 1931 by Lord Irwin, India\'s viceroy at pe time. The Gandhi-Irwin Accord, commonly referred to as pe Delhi Pact, established parity between pe Congress and pe administration.\n(vii) In 1934, pe movement ceased to exist. Congress passed a significant measure in 1934. It called for pe establishment of a constituent assembly pat would be chosen by pe general populace utilizing pe adult franchise.\n(viii) Despite not succeeding in its objective, pe Congress was successful in organizing sizable portions of pe populace for pe nation\'s second major popular uprising. It had also outlined ambitious objectives for changing Indian society. (1×8=8)\n\nOR\n\n(b) Gandhi\'s transformation of Indian nationalism : After leaving South Africa, Gandhiji, at Gokhale\'s recommendation, spent a year traveling throughout British India and getting to know the country\'s people. With the founding of the Banaras Hindu University (BHU) in February 1916, he made his first public appearance. An time for joy, the BHU\'s launch marked the start of a nationalist institution supported by Indian funding and effort. Gandhiji, however, opted to remind the audience of the peasants and labourers who made up the majority of the Indian population rather than adopting a tone of self-congratulation.\n---\n# Oswaal CBSE Question Bank Chapterwise & Topicwise, HISTORY, Class-XII\n\n|SECTION - D|\n|---|\n|31.1|Archaeologists classify the findings according to their intended uses. They further categorize according to the materials employed, with igneous rock or sandstone generally displaying traces of lifting machinery.|\n|31.2|Archaeologists utilize comparisons from modern life to comprehend ancient artifacts. They judge them based on how much they resemble contemporary objects like pots, beads, querns, and stone swords.|\n|31.3|Saddle Querns are plentiful and appear to have been the only method of grinding grains, according to Ernest Mackay, who noted their use. The majority of the wear and tear on them is due to their rough construction from igneous rock or sandstone. To keep them from wobbling, their bases were designed convex to set in the ground or dirt.|\n|32.1|Due to the fact that the primary goal of agriculture was to feed people, there was an abundance of land, a labour pool, and the mobility of peasants, which were all key factors in the ongoing expansion of the agricultural sector in Mughal period.|\n|32.2|The Mughals had installed irrigation systems in a variety of locations. People in the Lahore region used to pump water using wheels. People in Agra, Chandwar, and Bayana used to irrigate their fields with buckets and bulls.|\n|32.3|The storage of well water, surface water, and rainwater allowed for the development of a sophisticated irrigation system in Mughal India. Water from these sources was collected in tanks and then channeled through an extensive system of canals to supply the huge agricultural areas. The stored water was also used, as well as some water for this irrigation were wells and tanks. Various equipment was employed to transfer water from wells into field canals. The lever-operated wooden scoop, known as a dhenkl, was the most basic tool and could be used where the water was close to the surface.|\n|33.1|In North Bengal, Jotedars rebelled against the Zamindars of Dinajpur because they had disciplined them and reduced their authority.|\n|33.2|The Jotedars rallied the village\'s ryots, who were reliant on them. They provoked the tiny ryots to withhold their revenue as a result the Jotedars purposefully put off paying revenue to the Zamindars.|\n|33.3|The group of wealthy peasants was strengthening their power in the villages known as jotedars while a great number of zamindars were going through a crisis at the end of the 18th century (during the British East India Company). The jotedars, or affluent class peasants, had accumulated huge tracts of land by the early 19th century—sometimes as much as several thousand acres. Share-croppers who brought their own ploughs, worked in the field, and gave the jotedars half of the harvest were responsible for cultivating a sizable portion of the jotedars\' property.|\n---\n# SOLVED PAPER-2023 65\n\n# SECTION - E\n\n34.1 & 34.2\n\nOSWAAL BOOKS\n\n@EARNING MADE SIMPLE', start_char_idx=None, end_char_idx=None, text_template='{metadata_str}\n\n{content}', metadata_template='{key}: {value}', metadata_seperator='\n')]